---
title: "A collection of interesting concepts"
category: notes
layout: note
excerpt: "In my travels, I keep bumping into a few concepts; lingustic oddities that amuse me. I share them here."
---

## Headcanon
Headcanon is an idea, belief or aspect of a characterâ€™s personality or
physicality that is present in a piece of fanwork that does not correspond with
information present in the canonical material. - [Know Your
Meme](http://knowyourmeme.com/memes/headcanon)

## Heterodoxy
"Any opinions or doctrines at variance with an official or orthodox position."
Kind of like heresy, but less dangerous or divisive. Heterodox is *almost* a
synonym of "unorthodox", but not quite &mdash; the implication is that a
heterodox idea is an *alternative*, as opposed to something that's completely
weird or out there. - h.t. [Borges' *An Examination of the Work of Herbert
Quain*](http://oldsite.english.ucsb.edu/faculty/rraley/courses/engl165/scanners/Quain1.htm),
which can be found in
[*Ficciones*](http://www.amazon.com/Ficciones-Jorge-Luis-Borges/dp/0802130305)

## MacGuffin
A plot device in the form of some goal, desired object, or other motivator that
the protagonist pursues, often with little or no narrative explanation. The
specific nature of a MacGuffin is typically unimportant to the overall plot. -
[Wikipedia](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MacGuffin)

## Soloverse
Our mental model of the universe, which also happens to be our only direct
experience of the universe and the only way we have of understanding it, since
everything that we sense about it travels through the filter of our brain first.
- [Buster Benson's *Codex
  Vitae*](https://github.com/busterbenson/public/blob/master/Codex.md#soloverse)

## Thought Technology
A way of thinking about things that causes you to understand *other* things more
effectively. For example, take this [list of cognitive biases on
Wikipedia](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_cognitive_biases). Reading and
understanding any of the biases in this list will, at least in theory, inoculate
you slightly against making these sorts of mistakes in your thinking in the
future. - h.t. John Roderick and Merlin Mann, from their excellent podcast
[Roderick on the Line](http://www.merlinmann.com/roderick/)

## Uchronia
A hypothetical or fictional time-period of our world, similar to "alternate
history" but different in the manner that uchronic times are not easily defined.
See: "Merrie Olde England", the entire concept of "Steampunk", or even
"Cyberpunk" at this point (an alternate vision of the 1990's and early 2000's
where technology and the internet affected the world a whole lot differently
than it actually has). Of course, now there's even an online ["Uchronia
bibliography"](http://www.uchronia.net/) -- a curated collection of alternate
histories. - [Wikipedia](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Uchronia)
